Create rule S6471(docker): Running containers  a privileged user is security-sensitive - APPSEC-280 (#1397)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6471/docker/rule.adoc

For Linux-based images:

[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

USER nonroot

ENTRYPOINT ["id"]
----

For Windows-based images, you can use `ContainerUser` or create a new user:

[source,docker]
----
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/windows/servercore:ltsc2019

RUN net user /add nonroot

USER nonroot
----

If the `scratch` Dockerfile untars a Linux distribution, the "Linux image"
solution should be applied. Else, you have a choice between using a pre-written
`/etc/passwd` file (regardless of the host operating system) or using a
multi-stage build.

[source,docker]
----
FROM scratch

COPY etc_passwd /etc/passwd
# contains "nonroot:x:1337:1337:nonroot:/nonroot:/usr/sbin/nologin"

USER nonroot

COPY production_binary /app

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
----

or you can use a multi-stage build:

[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine:latest as security_provider
RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

FROM scratch as production
COPY --from=security_provider /etc/passwd /etc/passwd
USER nonroot
COPY production_binary /app
ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
----

For multi-stage builds:
[source,docker]
----

> FROM alpine as builder
> 
> COPY Makefile ./src /
> 
> RUN make build
> 
> FROM alpine as runtime
> 
> RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
>     && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot
> 
> COPY --from=builder bin/production /app
> 
> USER nonroot
> 
> ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FROM alpine as builder
COPY Makefile ./src /
RUN make build

FROM alpine as runtime
RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot
COPY --from=builder bin/production /app
USER nonroot
ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]
```

Running containers with root as the default user weakens their runtime security,
allowing any user whose code runs on the container to perform administrative
actions. +

> On Windows containers, the equivalent is `ContainerAdmin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Windows containers, the equivalent is `ContainerAdministrator`.
```

[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine:latest as security_provider

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

FROM scratch as production

COPY --from=security_provider /etc/passwd /etc/passwd

USER nonroot

COPY production_binary /app

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
----

For multi-stage builds:
[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine as builder

COPY Makefile ./src /

RUN make build

FROM alpine as runtime

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

COPY --from=builder bin/production /app

USER nonroot

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]
----

== See

* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/284.html[MITRE, CWE-284] - Improper Access Control
* https://hub.docker.com/r/nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged[nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged: Example of a non-root container by default]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/manage-containers/container-security#when-to-use-containeradmin-and-containeruser-user-accounts[Microsoft docs, When to use ContainerAdmin and ContainerUser user accounts]

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''
== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> Set in https://sonarsource.atlassian.net/browse/SONARIAC-478[SONARIAC-478].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* noncompliant scratch images: "Scratch images run as root by default. Make sure it is safe here."
* Official noncompliant image: "The {image} image runs with root as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
* Microsoft non-compliant images: "This image runs with root or containerAdministrator as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
* Unofficial noncompliant image: "This image might run with root as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
* the last USER is root or containerAdministrator: "Setting the default user as root might unnecessarily make the application unsafe. Make sure it is safe here."
```

=== Highlighting

> Set in https://sonarsource.atlassian.net/browse/SONARIAC-478[SONARIAC-478].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Unsafe FROM: "FROM name" instruction
* Last USER is root or containerAdministrator: "USER name" instruction
```

> Running containers with root as the default user weakens their runtime security,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running containers as a privileged user weakens their runtime security,
```

allowing any user whose code runs on the container to perform administrative
actions. +

> On Windows containers, the equivalent is `ContainerAdministrator`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Linux containers, the privileged user is usually named `root`. In Windows containers, the equivalent is `ContainerAdministrator`.
```

Without this addition "equivalent" does not match anything.

A malicious user can run code on a system either thanks to actions that could
be deemed legitimate - depending on internal business logic or operational
management shells - or thanks to malicious actions. For example, with arbitrary
code execution after exploiting a service that the container hosts.

Suppose the container is not hardened to prevent using a shell, interpreter, or
https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/capabilities.7.html[Linux capabilities].
In this case, the malicious user can read and exfiltrate any file (including
from Docker volumes), open new network connections, install malicious software,
or, worse, break out of the container's isolation context by exploiting other
components.

Depending on the infrastructure's resilience, attackers may then extend their
attack to other services, such as Kubernetes clusters or cloud providers, in
order to maximize their reach.

== Ask Yourself Whether

This container:

* Serves internet-facing services.

> * Does not require any root permission to run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Does not require a privileged user to run.
```

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of those questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

In the Dockerfile:

* Create a new default user and use it with the `USER` statement.
** Some container maintainers create a specific user to be used without explicitly setting it as default, such as `postgresql` or `zookeeper`. It is recommended to use these users instead of root.
** On Windows containers, the `ContainerUser` is available for this purpose.

Or, at launch time:

* Use the `user` argument when calling Docker or in the docker-compose file.
* Add fine-grained Linux capabilities to perform specific actions that require root privileges.

> If this image is already explicitly set to launch with a non-root user, you can

Reviewer 2: For consistency, I would replace the root here with the generic privileged user as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this image is already explicitly set to launch with a non-privileged user, you can
```

> add it to the `safe_images` rule property of your SonarQube instance, without the tag.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this key will be really visible in the final implementation? If not, I would recommend doing the statement without explicitly mentioning the name of the property. So what I mean is that you could write it like this instead:

> If this image is already explicitly set to launch with a non-root user, you can
> add it to the safe images rule property of your SonarQube instance, without the tag.

the `USER` instruction with a non-root user:

[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine as builder
COPY Makefile ./src /
RUN make build
USER nonroot

# Sensitive, previous user settings are dropped
FROM alpine as runtime
COPY --from=builder bin/production /app
ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]
----

== Compliant Solution

For Linux-based images:

[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

USER nonroot

ENTRYPOINT ["id"]
----

For Windows-based images, you can use `ContainerUser` or create a new user:

[source,docker]
----
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/windows/servercore:ltsc2019

RUN net user /add nonroot

USER nonroot
----

If the `scratch` Dockerfile untars a Linux distribution, the "Linux image"
solution should be applied. Else, you have a choice between using a pre-written
`/etc/passwd` file (regardless of the host operating system) or using a
multi-stage build.

[source,docker]
----
FROM scratch

COPY etc_passwd /etc/passwd
# contains "nonroot:x:1337:1337:nonroot:/nonroot:/usr/sbin/nologin"

USER nonroot

COPY production_binary /app

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
----

or you can use a multi-stage build:

> [source,docker]

Reviewer 2: Same as for the sensitive example, I would reduce the number of empty newlines here a bit to make the different stages more visible.

----

> FROM alpine:latest as security_provider
> 
> RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
>     && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot
> 
> FROM scratch as production
> 
> COPY --from=security_provider /etc/passwd /etc/passwd
> 
> USER nonroot
> 
> COPY production_binary /app
> 
> ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FROM alpine:latest as security_provider
RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

FROM scratch as production
COPY --from=security_provider /etc/passwd /etc/passwd
USER nonroot
COPY production_binary /app
ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
```

----

For multi-stage builds:
[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine as builder

COPY Makefile ./src /

RUN make build

FROM alpine as runtime

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

COPY --from=builder bin/production /app

USER nonroot

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]
----

== See

* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/284.html[MITRE, CWE-284] - Improper Access Control
* https://hub.docker.com/r/nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged[nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged: Example of a non-root container by default]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/manage-containers/container-security#when-to-use-containeradmin-and-containeruser-user-accounts[Microsoft docs, When to use ContainerAdmin and ContainerUser user accounts]

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''
== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> * noncompliant scratch images: "Scratch images run as root by default. Make sure it is safe here."

Reviewer 2: Consistency: some of the entries in this list are capitalized, others are not.

> * noncompliant scratch images: "Scratch images run as root by default. Make sure it is safe here."
> * Official noncompliant image: "The `image` image runs with root as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
> * Microsoft non-compliant images: "This image runs with root or containerAdministrator as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
> * Unofficial noncompliant image: "This image might run with root as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
> * the last USER is root or containerAdministrator: "Setting the default user as root might unnecessarily make the application unsafe. Make sure it is safe here."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Noncompliant scratch images: "Scratch images run as root by default. Make sure it is safe here."
* Official noncompliant image: "The `image` image runs with root as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
* Microsoft non-compliant images: "This image runs with root or containerAdministrator as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
* Unofficial noncompliant image: "This image might run with root as the default user. Make sure it is safe here."
* The last USER is root or containerAdministrator: "Setting the default user as root might unnecessarily make the application unsafe. Make sure it is safe here."
```

> Running containers with root as the default user weakens their runtimes,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running containers with root as the default user weakens their runtime security,
```
maybe?

allowing any user whose code runs on the container to perform administrative
actions. +
On Windows containers, the equivalent is `ContainerAdmin`.

A malicious user can run code on a system either thanks to actions that could
be deemed legitimate - depending on internal business logic or operational
management shells - or thanks to malicious actions. For example, with arbitrary
code execution after exploiting a service that the container hosts.

Suppose the container is not hardened to prevent using a shell, interpreter, or
https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/capabilities.7.html[Linux capabilities].
In this case, the malicious user can read and exfiltrate any file (including
from Docker volumes), open new network connections, install malicious software,
or, worse, break out of the container's isolation context by exploiting other
components.

Depending on the infrastructure's resilience, attackers may then extend their
attack to other services, such as Kubernetes clusters or cloud providers, in

> order to maximize their profits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
order to maximize their reach.
```
Or "influence" maybe? Profit really depends on the attacker.

Reviewer: With "profit" I wanted to give a concrete goal of the "why" of an attacker. But now I realize that this might be out of context and ambiguous. I'm gonna go with "reach"

== Ask Yourself Whether

This container:

* Serves internet-facing services.
* Does not require any root permission to run.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of those questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

> On the Dockerfile:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Dockerfile:
```
Not sure but "on" sounds strange to me.

Reviewer: absolutely right, I think that's a frenchization

> * Create a new default user and use it with the `USER` statement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Create a new default user and use it with the `USER` statement.
```

> ** Some container maintainers create a specific user to be used without explicitly setting it as default, such as `postgresql` or `zookeeper`. It is recommended to use these users instead of your own.

Reviewer 2: I assume PostgreSQL simply drops the root permissions to `postgresql` in the PostgreSQL daemon itself? In that case, I am not sure if "It is recommended to use these users instead of your own." is true.

Reviewer: Hmm this does not seem highlighted in the postgres Dockerfile, but I agree that "instead of root" sounds better here.

```suggestion
** Some container maintainers create a specific user to be used without explicitly setting it as default, such as `postgresql` or `zookeeper`. It is recommended to use these users instead of root.
```

Reviewer: Please tell me WDYT about this during the second review pass, I now have doubts about mentioning the prealably-created users. It's right that in the end the user can be made unsafe by the initial image. 🤔

** On Windows containers, the `ContainerUser` is available for this purpose.

Or, at launch time:

> * Use the `user` argument when calling docker or in the docker-compose file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use the `user` argument when calling Docker or in the docker-compose file.
```

Since Docker is a name and the established writing uses an upper-case D, I would use that writing.

* Add fine-grained Linux capabilities to perform specific actions that require root privileges.

If this image is already explicitly set to launch with a non-root user, you can
add it to the `safe_images` rule property of your SonarQube instance, without the tag.

== Sensitive Code Example

For any image that does not provide a user by default, regardless of their
underlying operating system:

[source,docker]

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
# Sensitive
```

> FROM alpine # Sensitive

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, in Dockerfiles comments can not come after a command.

> FROM alpine # Sensitive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Sensitive
FROM alpine
```

ENTRYPOINT ["id"]
----

For multi-stage builds, the last stage is non-compliant if it does not contain
the `USER` instruction with a non-root user:

[source,docker]
----

> FROM alpine as builder
> 
> COPY Makefile ./src /
> 
> RUN make build
> 
> USER nonroot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FROM alpine as builder
COPY Makefile ./src /
RUN make build
USER nonroot
```

> 

Reviewer 2: It would be a bit easier to see the "multi-stage part" if this line would be the only empty newline in the sample, i.e. I would remove line 65, 67, 69 etc. as they do not help to increase the readability and just make the sample longer.

> FROM alpine as runtime # Sensitive, previous user settings are dropped

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Sensitive, previous user settings are dropped
FROM alpine as runtime
```

> 
> COPY --from=builder bin/production /app
> 
> ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
COPY --from=builder bin/production /app
ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]
```

----

> For `scratch` based images:

Reviewer 2: I don't think it is necessary to have this many examples here. The issue in general is not hard to understand. Having a multi-stage example additionally makes sense but I would remove the "scratch" and "node" samples as they are very close to the first sample.

Reviewer: Hmm yeah you are right. I think they got the point at this point haha

> [source,docker]
> ----
> FROM scratch # Sensitive
> 
> ADD production_binary /app
> 
> ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
> ----
> 
> Setting a non-root user and then a root user as the last `USER` instruction:
> 
> [source,docker]
> ----
> FROM node
> 
> USER node
> RUN npm install
> 
> USER root # Sensitive
> 
> ENTRYPOINT ["/production.js"]
> ----
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine:latest as security_provider

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

FROM scratch as production

COPY --from=security_provider /etc/passwd /etc/passwd

USER nonroot

COPY production_binary /app

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production_binary"]
----

For multi-stage builds:
[source,docker]
----
FROM alpine as builder

COPY Makefile ./src /

RUN make build

FROM alpine as runtime

RUN addgroup -S nonroot \
    && adduser -S nonroot -G nonroot

COPY --from=builder bin/production /app

USER nonroot

ENTRYPOINT ["/app/production"]
----

== See

* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/284.html[MITRE, CWE-284] - Improper Access Control
* https://hub.docker.com/r/nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged[nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged: Example of a non-root container by default]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/manage-containers/container-security#when-to-use-containeradmin-and-containeruser-user-accounts[Microsoft docs, When to use ContainerAdmin and ContainerUser user accounts]

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''
== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> Set in https://sonarsource.atlassian.net/browse/SONARIAC-478[SONARIAC-478].

Reviewer: Ok 👍 Like for some stuff in our pocs I wanted to test and see how it sounded to you. I'm going to update it.
